Third parties 2021 markdown (#2419)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2021/third-parties.md

It is difficult enough to set up CSP in the first place for the parts of the site in your control, without the added complexity of third parties making it even more difficult for things outside of your control! Third parties really should get better at supporting CSP to make it easier for sites to reduce the risk of using them.

> ### Privacy

Reviewer: @maudnals any feedback about this section?

In this chapter we're going to have a look at the state of third parties on the web: how much are we using them, what are we using them for, has our use changed over the last year given in particular the three concerns listed above? These are questions I'm looking to answer here.

## Definitions

We make have different ideas of what constitutes a "third party" or "using third-party content", so we'll start with a definition of what we consider a third party for this chapter:

> ### "Third party"

Author: This was a convention followed in the last two years, and kind of matches the quotes in the previous sentence. Does that change your opinion here?

> ### "Third party"

Reviewer: If it's a convention then SGTM

Note that using these definitions, third-party content served from a first-party domain is counted as first-party content. For example, self-hosting Google Fonts or `bootstrap.css` is counted as _first-party content_.

Similarly, first-party content served from a third-party domain is counted as third-party content—assuming it passes the "more than 50 pages criteria", which it may well do based on domain, even if the resource itself is unique to that website. For example, first-party images served over a CDN on a third-party domain are considered _third-party content_.

### Third-party categories

This year we will, again, be drawing heavily on the <a hreflang="en" href="https://github.com/patrickhulce/third-party-web/blob/master/data/entities.js">third-party-web repository</a> from <a hreflang="en" href="https://twitter.com/patrickhulce">Patrick Hulce</a> to help us identify and categorize third parties. This repository categorizes commonly used third-party URLs into the following categories:

> - **Ad** - display and measurement of advertisements

Author: I've switched the the official definitions from here which are more consistent: https://github.com/patrickhulce/third-party-web/blob/master/data/categories.json. I've edited some of them down to first sentence.

- **Video** - providers that host the arbitrary video content of their users
- **Other** - uncategorized or non-conforming activity

<p class="note">Note on CDNs: The CDN category here includes providers that provide resources on public CDN domains (e.g. bootstrapcdn.com, cdnjs.cloudflare.com, etc.) and does not include resources that are simply served over a CDN. i.e. putting Cloudflare in front of a page would not influence its first-party designation according to our criteria.</p>

One difference that we have taken this year is to remove the Hosting category from our data this year. If you happen to use Wordpress.com for your blog, or Shopify for your ecommerce platform, then we're going to ignore other requests for those domains by that site as not truly "third-party", as they are in many ways part of hosting on those platforms. Similar to the way we noted above, we do not consider CDNs in front of a page to be "third party".

In reality this made very little difference to the numbers, but we feel it's a more accurate reflection of what we should consider "third party" by above definition, and also aligns more closely with how the other chapters use this term.

> ### Caveats

Author: It was for the last two years.

> ### Caveats

Reviewer: SGTM

## Prevalence

So how much are third parties used? Well, the answer is a lot!

{{ figure_markup(
  caption="Percentage of mobile sites using at least one third-party resource.",
  content="94.40%",
  classes="big-number",
  sheets_gid="1082574922",
  sql_file="percent_of_websites_with_third_party.sql"
)
}}

A staggering 94.40% of mobile sites, and 94.07% of desktop sites use at least one third-party resource. Even with our newer restrictive definition of third-parties this represents a continued growth from when the Web Almanac started in 2019.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-websites-using-third-parties-by-year.png",
  caption="Websites using third-parties by year.",
  description="Bar chart showing the number of websites using third parties over the last three years, split by desktop and mobile. On desktop 89.1% of websites used a third party in 2019, followed by 93.9% in 2020, and 94.1% in 2021. On mobile 88.5% used a third party in 2019, followed by 94.0% in 2020, and 94.4% in 2021",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1728778967&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="1082574922",

Author: But how can I do that within one graph and keep the label consistent?

And not entirely convinced about your graph. Looks a bit grey scale and difficult to differentiate between then.

>   sheets_gid="1082574922",

Reviewer: It would probably require one chart for desktop and one for mobile.

What I was going for in the chart was that these are all mobile stats but they fade out the further away from this year you get.

Feel free to ignore.

>   sheets_gid="1082574922",

Author: The fading does introduce colour contrast issues (a touchy subject as we've seen!)

I'm gonna ignore if you don't mind.

chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=2111523872&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1338630434",
  sql_file="distribution_of_websites_by_number_of_third_parties.sql"
  )
}}

Looking at the spread, we see there is a large variance with websites only using two third parties–measured as the number of distinct third-party hostnames–at the 10th percentile, up to 89 or 91 at the 90th percentile.

Note the 90th percentile is down a bit from [last year's analysis](../2020/third-parties#fig-2), where we had 104 and 106 third parties for desktop and mobile respectively but this looks to be due to restricting our domains to assets used by 50 websites or more this year, which was not done for this statistic last year.

The median website uses 21 third parties on mobile and 23 on desktop, which still seems like quite a lot!

### Third party prevalence by rank

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-websites-using-third-parties-by-rank.png",
  caption="Websites using third parties by rank.",

>   description="Bar chart showing the percentage of websites using third parties by mobile and desktop, across various rank categories. For the top 1,000 websites 96.60% of desktop 96.91% of mobile sites use websites, which is similar to the top 10,000 sites at 96.76% and 96.58% respectively, and the top 100,000 at 94.53% and 94.41%, and the top million websites at 93.37% and 93.28% and finally all sites are at 94.07% and 94.40% respectively.",

Author: Done across all charts and descriptions

## Third-party type

Our analysis shows we're using third parties a lot, but what are we using them for? Looking at the categories of each third-party request we see the following:

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-requests-by-type.png",
  caption="Third-party requests by type.",
  description="Stacked bar chart showing that `ad` third-parties are 25.7% desktop third parties and 29.1% of mobile, `unknown` are 19.8% and 19.6% respectively, `cdn` 15.2% and 13.4%, `social` 11.0% and 10.1%, `utility` 8.6% and 8.7%, `analytics` 8.0% and 8.6%, `video` 4.0% and 3.5%, `tag-manager` 2.5% and 2.4%, `customer-success` 1.6% and 1.5%, `marketing` 1.4% and 1.2%, `content` 1.1% and 0.9%, `other` 0.9% and 0.8%, and finally `consent-provider` 0.2% and 0.2%.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1925773513&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="1613966374",

Author: Done.

### Third-party requests by type and rank

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-median-third-party-requests-by-type-and-rank-on-mobile.png",
  caption="Median third-party requests by type and rank.",
  description="Stacked bar chart showing the number of requests of each type by ranking. For the top 1,000 websites there are a median of 20 `ad` third parties, 17 `unknown`, 4 `cdn`, 6 `social`, 3 `utility`, 5 `analytics`, 3 `video`, 2 `tag-manager`, 9 `customer-success`, 2 `marketing`, 5 `content`, 2 `other`, and 6 `consent-provider`. For the top 10,000 websites the median values are 19, 12, 4, 6, 4, 5, 4, 2, 9, 2, 5, 2, and 6. For the top 100,000 it's 13, 9, 5, 6, 3, 4, 9, 2, 10, 3, 5, 2, and 4. For the top million it's 6, 7, 5, 5, 3, 3, 11, 1, 10, 3, 5, 2, and 2. For all sites it's 4, 7, 5, 5, 3, 3, 11, 1, 9, 3, 5, 2, and 1.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1542898751&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="1430893885",

Author: An interesting bug in Google Sheets. If you mix label types (e.g. numbers and text like I had), then it shows fine in Sheets, but will not in the publish. You need to change them all to text (which screws up the order - so you have to add _another_ column with them as numbers to sort that). Anyway sorted now but one to keep an eye out for, for the other chapters. Tricky to figure out and get it to display properly.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-usage-by-content-type.png",
  caption="Third-party usage by content type.",
  description="Stacked bar chart showing. `script` resources make up 33.6% of third-party requests on desktop, `image` 28.7%, `html` 10.6%, `other` 7.9%, `font` 8.4%, `css` 6.4%, `text` 3.8%, `video` 0.3%, `audio` 0.2%, and finally `xml` 0.1%. On mobile `script` resources are 33.2% of third-party resources, `image` 28.6%, `html` 12.3%, `other` 8.6%, `font` 6.7%, `css` 6.3%, `text` 3.7%, `video` 0.2%, `audio` 0.2%, and finally `xml` 0.1%.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=521975460&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="655382603",
  sql_file="percent_of_third_parties_by_content_type.sql"
  )
}}

Unsurprisingly, JavaScript, images, and HTML comprise the majority of third-party requests. JavaScript is used by most third parties to add functionality (whether that be in ads, trackers, or libraries). Similarly, the high usage of images is to be expected, as they will include the 1-pixel blank images so beloved of tracking solutions.

> The high usage of HTML surprised me initially (surely documents would be the prevalent form of HTML and they would be first-party requests?), but investigation showed them mostly to be iframes which makes much more sense as they are often used to house ads, or other widgets (e.g. YouTube serves an HTML document in an iframe including the player, rather than just the video itself).

Author: Reworded instead to: "The high usage of HTML may seem surprising initially (surely documents would be the prevalent form of HTML and they would be first-party requests?), but our investigation showed them"

So purely on the number of requests, it seems to be functionality we're adding, rather than content — though that's a little misleading since, as per the YouTube example, this adds functionality to enable the content.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-bytes-by-content-type-and-category-on-mobile.png",
  caption="Third-party requests by content type and category.",
  description="Bar chart showing the breakdown of each third-party type by content type for mobile. `ad` third-party requests are fairly evenly divided by script, image, html and other with a small amount of text. `analytics` are mostly script and images, with a small amount of html, other and text. For `cdn` requests it is a mixture of script, image, css but mostly fonts. For the next set (`consent-providers`, `content`, `customer-success`, `marketing`, `other`, `social`, `tag-manager`, `unknown` and `utility` are nearly all scripts or images. `video` is similar with the amount of video content not even noticeable on the graph.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=4067008&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="1613966374",

Author: Fixed the subtitles (and also change the x-axis to note they are third-party requests).

I don't remember squashing it in, and playing around a bit more with the height I don't think it's any clearer even with more height. So think we should keep as is.

>   sheets_gid="1613966374",

Reviewer: SGTM

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-requests-by-content-type-and-category-on-mobile.png",
  caption="Third-party requests by content type and category (mobile).",
  description="Bar chart showing the third-party bytes by third-party type and content type. For `ad` it's mostly script bytes, with a small amount of image and html and little of anything else. For `analytics` it's 98% scripts, for `cdn` it's nearly all script or font, for `consent-provider` again it's nearly all script. `content` type is a little script, some image, but mostly video and a little audio. `customer-success` is nearly all script, `marketing` is mostly script and image, `other` is mostly image with a bit of script, social is mostly script or image, tag-manager is 99.8% script, `unknown` is a little script and a lot of images, utility is mostly script with some image, and video is similar with only a small amount of actual video.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=304580528&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="1613966374",

Author: Fix subtitle and axis.

Same pushback against height changes - feel free to have a lot yourself and see what you think: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1tf4RMF8SYr6he9tbqt61yuFJ_QK-F-i7XPxaPkpKSDI/edit#gid=1613966374

>   sheets_gid="1613966374",

Reviewer: I'll defer to you on the height thing

  )
}}

When looking by bytes, rather than by requests, the amount of JavaScript is even more worrying. Again, I've shown mobile here, but there are no major differences for desktop.

To quote <a hreflang="en" href="https://twitter.com/addyosmani">Addy Osmani</a> (twice!) in the same sentence from his <a hreflang="en" href="https://medium.com/@addyosmani/the-cost-of-javascript-in-2018-7d8950fbb5d4">"Cost of JavaScript"</a> post, "byte-for-byte, JavaScript is still the most expensive resource we send", and "a 200 KB script and a 200 KB image have very different costs". Some categories like analytics, consent-provider, tag-manager are pretty much all JavaScript, while others like ad, customer-success, are not far behind. We'll return to the performance impact of using third-party resources later - often caused by costly use of JavaScript.

## Third-party domains

Who are we loading all these third-party requests from? Most of these names won't be surprising, but the prevalence of one name just reiterates the dominance that company has across a number of different categories:

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-top-15-by-usage.png",
  caption="Top 15 third parties by usage.",

>   description="Bar chart showing the top 15 third parties by percentage of websites using them separated by desktop and mobile. `*.google-analytics.com` is used on 66.17% of desktop pages and 62.69% of mobile, `fonts.googleapis.com` is 65.12% and 62.02% respectively, `adservice.google.com` is 50.53% and 48.87%, `accounts.google.com` is 50.32% and 48.94%, `*.googletagmanager.com` is 44.82% and 42.50%, `ajax.googleapis.com` is 35.47% and 31.06%, `*.facebook.com` is 30.84% and 29.18%, `amp.cloudflare.com` is 12.84% and 12.01%, `*.youtube.com` is 11.29% and 10.20%, `*.bootstrapcdn.com` is 10.08% and 9.71%, `maps.google.com` is 7.96% and 9.07%, `*.jsdelivr.net` is 7.06% and 6.61%, `*.jquery.com` is 6.25% and 5.88%, `*.fontawesome.com` is 6.31% and 5.80%, and finally `*.adobedtm.com` is 4.46% and 5.57%.",

Author: Done.

chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1408467789&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="564520146",

Author: Done and done.

  width=600,
  height=486,
  sql_file="top100_third_parties_by_number_of_websites.sql"
  )
}}

> Google takes 8 of the top 15 most used third parties—including the top six spots!—and has no else comes close. Google is a market leader in Analytics, Fonts, Ads, Accounts, Tag Managers, and Video to name but a few. A staggering 62.69% of mobile websites use Google Analytics, and almost as many use Google Fonts, with Ads, Accounts and Tag Manager usage not far behind in the 42% - 49 % range.

Author: Accepted most of these except "top six" to "top 6". Our editors wiki says:

> Numbers less than ten should be written ("nine" not "9") except for percentages.

So shouldn't this stay as "six"?

> Google takes 8 of the top 15 most used third parties—including the top six spots!—and has no else comes close. Google is a market leader in Analytics, Fonts, Ads, Accounts, Tag Managers, and Video to name but a few. A staggering 62.69% of mobile websites use Google Analytics, and almost as many use Google Fonts, with Ads, Accounts and Tag Manager usage not far behind in the 42% - 49 % range.

Reviewer: Usually yes, but there's another rule (not sure if in our wiki) that numbers should appear as digits for consistency with other numbers in the sentence. So "6" would be correct here, for the same reason why "8 of the top 15" isn't "eight of the top 15".

> Google takes 8 of the top 15 most used third parties—including the top six spots!—and has no else comes close. Google is a market leader in Analytics, Fonts, Ads, Accounts, Tag Managers, and Video to name but a few. A staggering 62.69% of mobile websites use Google Analytics, and almost as many use Google Fonts, with Ads, Accounts and Tag Manager usage not far behind in the 42% - 49 % range.

Author: Fair point - changed.

The first non-Google entity is Facebook with a comparatively low usage of 29.18%. This is followed by Cloudflare's CDN fronting popular libraries and other resources (despite being listed as amp.cloudflare.com it also includes the much larger cdnjs.cloudflare–this has been updated to show the more commonly used domain for next year).

After this we're back to Google with YouTube, and Maps two spots later. The remaining spots are filled with CDNs for other popular libraries and tools.

## Performance impact of third parties

> Using third parties can have a noticeable impact on performance. That's not necessarily a consequence of them being a third party per se—the same functionality implemented by a site owner as a first-party resource would often cause similar performance issues—if not worse, given the expertise the third party should have on the particular field.

Author: Changed it to this, let me know if that is clearer:

> Using third parties can have a noticeable impact on performance. That's not necessarily a consequence of them being a third party per se. The same functionality implemented by a site owner as a first-party resource can often be less performant, given the expertise the third party should have on the particular field.

> Using third parties can have a noticeable impact on performance. That's not necessarily a consequence of them being a third party per se—the same functionality implemented by a site owner as a first-party resource would often cause similar performance issues—if not worse, given the expertise the third party should have on the particular field.

Reviewer: LGTM!

However, a third party's business is in allowing their content or service to be hosted on many websites, they have a duty to ensure they minimise the negative impact of that. Especially since site owners often have limited control over, and influence on the performance impact of third parties other than to use them or not.

### Using third-party domains versus self-hosting

There is a definite cost to connecting to another domain, even though most third parties will be using globally distributed, high-performance CDNs, and many web performance advocates (including myself!) recommend self-hosting where possible to avoid this penalty. This is particularly relevant now that all the major browsers have moved away from sharing caches between origins, so the claim that once one site has downloaded that resource, others can benefit from it is no longer true. Though this was a questionable claim even in the past in this author's opinion given the number of versions of libraries, and limitations of the HTTP cache.

> Saying that, rarely is life as definitive as we would like and, in some cases self-hosting may actually cost performance. I've <a hreflang="en" href="https://www.tunetheweb.com/blog/should-you-self-host-google-fonts/">written before how the question on whether to self-host Google Fonts</a> is not as clear cut as it might seem and requires a degree of expertise to ensure you are replicating all that Google Fonts does for you in the performance front. To avoid that hassle you can just use the hosted version, and ensure you're <a hreflang="en" href="https://csswizardry.com/2020/05/the-fastest-google-fonts/">reducing the performance impact as much as possible</a>.

Author: Changed to:

```html
To avoid that hassle you can just use the hosted version, and ensure you're reducing the performance impact as much as possible, as discussed by <a hreflang="en" href="https://twitter.com/csswizardry">Harry Roberts</a> in his <a hreflang="en" href="https://csswizardry.com/2020/05/the-fastest-google-fonts/">The Fastest Google Fonts</a> post.
```

> Similarly, image CDNs can optimize media better than most and, more importantly, can do this automatically without the need of manual steps that will inevitably be skipped or done incorrectly on occasion.

Author: Accepted the suggestion, and clarified what I meant by "most":

> Similarly, image CDNs can optimize media better than most firsty-parties and, more importantly, can do this automatically without the need for manual steps that will inevitably be skipped or done incorrectly on occasion.

I think it's tough to make this more data driven since there are some factors at play (as I allude to in my first sentence). To really measure CDNs impact we'd need the same image on both.

I'm comfortable giving a brief breather from the stats here — as you'll have seen we're about to go very stat heavy and text-light with the embeds in this section anyway.

#### Popular third parties and their impact on render

To investigate this, we use the Lighthouse render-blocking resources audit, and limit it just to third-party resources, by linking up to the third-party web resources library.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-most-popular-third-parties-impact-on-render.png",
  caption="Top 15 third parties impact on render.",
  description="Bar chart showing the percentage of times the top 15 third parties block render. `*.google-analytics.com` is blocking render 0.07% of the time, `fonts.googleapis.com` is 51.25% `accounts.google.com` is 3.17% `adservice.google.com` is 0.49% `*.googletagmanager.com` is 4.52% `ajax.googleapis.com` is 22.65% `*.facebook.com` is 0.10% `amp.cloudflare.com` is 44.95% `*.youtube.com` is 1.04% `*.bootstrapcdn.com` is 63.16% `maps.google.com` is 13.63% `*.jsdelivr.net` is 30.27% `*.jquery.com` is 46.38% `*.fontawesome.com` is 66.04% `*.adobedtm.com` is 3.06%.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1221471478&format=interactive",
  width=600,
  height=585,

>   sheets_gid="1866731351",

Author: Fixed decimal and changed axis to "Percent of pages for which the third party is blocking"

  )
}}

The top 15 most popular third parties are shown above and for what percentage of resources they block the initial render of the page.

On the whole this is a positive story—most do not block rendering, and those that do are for common libraries associated with layout (e.g. bootstrap) or fonts that perhaps should block initial render (<a hreflang="en" href="https://twitter.com/tunetheweb/status/1364278446311043073">I personally don't agree that using `font-display: swap` or `optional` is a good thing</a>).

Often third-party embeds advise using `async` or `defer` with the specific aim of avoiding being render-blocking, and it looks like this might be the case for many of them.

#### Popular third parties and their impact on main thread

Lighthouse has a <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/third-party-summary/">Reduce the impact of third-party code</a> audit lists the main-thread times of all third-party resources. So how long do the most popular ones block the main thread for?

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-popular-third-parties-main-thread-blocking-time.png",
  caption="Top 15 third parties median main-thread blocking time.",

>   description="Bar chart showing median main-thread blocking times on mobile for the most popular third parties.",

Author: Ooops missed this one. Added now.

chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=973901251&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="329121076",

Author: I didn't like the apostrophe so changed it to "Main-thread blocking time of top 15 third parties."

I'd like to keep the order as consistent with the two graphs above.

  width=600,
  height=585,
  sql_file="third_parties_blocking_main_thread.sql"
  )
}}

Here we see YouTube sticking out like a sore thumb so let's delve into that a little more:

##### YouTube

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-youtube-main-thread-impact.png",

>   caption="YouTube impact on the main thread.",

Author: Fixed

  description="Bar chart showing the impact YouTube has on the main thread on mobile by blocking time, and transfer size by percentile. The blocking time is 0.00 seconds at the 10th and 25th percentile, 1.63 seconds at the 50th percentile, 2.51 seconds at the 75th percentile, and 4.55 seconds at the 90th percentile. This correlates closely with the increase in transfer size from 43 kilobytes at the 10th percentiles, 129 KiB at the 25th percentile, 703 at 50th, 800 at the 75th and 968 at the 90th percentile.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=291120635&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1536436674",
  sql_file="third_parties_blocking_main_thread_percentiles.sql"
  )
}}

> We can see a huge impact of 1.63 seconds of main-thread activity at the median (50th percentile), rising to a shocking 4.55 seconds of main-thread blocking at the 90th percentile (still meaning 10% of websites have a worse impact than even that!). It's also apparent that the impact increases with transfer size–perhaps not surprising as there is more to process. And remember that our crawl does not interact with these videos, so these are either auto-playing videos, or the YouTube player itself causing all this use.

Author: Changed it to this:

> We can see a huge impact of 1.6 seconds of main-thread activity at the median (50th percentile), rising to a shocking 4.6 seconds of main-thread blocking at the 90th percentile (still meaning 10% of websites have a worse impact than even that!). It should be remembered however that these are throttled, lab-simulated timings, so many real users may not be experiencing this level of impact, but it is still a lot.

Google Ads was doing so well, until we hit the 90th percentile, when it got blown off the chart. Again, a reminder that this means 10% of websites have worse numbers than these.

##### Google Tag Manager

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-google-tag-manager-main-thread-impact.png",
  caption="Google Tag Manager impact on the main thread.",
  description="Bar chart showing the impact Google Tag Manager has on the main thread on mobile by blocking time, and transfer size by percentile. The blocking time is 0 milliseconds at the 10th percentile, 4 milliseconds at the 25th percentile, 42 milliseconds at the 50th percentile, 129 milliseconds at the 75th percentile, and 275 milliseconds at the 90th percentile. This correlates closely with the increase in transfer size from 35 kilobytes at the 10th percentiles, 36 KiB at the 25th percentile, 39 at 50th, 74 at the 75th and 116 at the 90th percentile.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1275343309&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1536436674",
  sql_file="third_parties_blocking_main_thread_percentiles.sql"
  )
}}

> Google Tag Manager fares much better than I thought it would to be honest. I've seen some horrific GTM implementations overloaded with old tags and triggers that are no longer used. But GTM seems to do well at not blocking the main thread for too long in our test page loads.

Author: Changed to:

> Google Tag Manager fares much better than expected to be honest. This author has seen some horrific GTM implementations, overloaded with old tags and triggers that are no longer used. But GTM seems to do well at not blocking the main thread for too long in our test page loads.

  caption="Google Maps impact on the main thread.",
  description="Bar chart showing the impact Google Maps has on the main thread on mobile by blocking time, and transfer size by percentile. The blocking time is 18 milliseconds at the 10th percentile, 61 at the 25th percentile, 259 milliseconds at the 50th percentile, 617 milliseconds at the 75th percentile, and 930 milliseconds at the 90th percentile. This correlates somewhat with the increase in transfer size from 164 kilobytes at the 10th percentiles, 165 KiB at the 25th percentile, 273 at 50th, 310 at the 75th and 434 at the 90th percentile.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=934181875&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1536436674",
  sql_file="third_parties_blocking_main_thread_percentiles.sql"
  )
}}

Google Maps definitely needs some improvement. Especially as it's often present as a small extra piece on a page, rather than the main content. As a website owner, this highlights the importance of only including the Google Maps code on pages which require it.

##### Twitter

> And finally, I wanted to look at one further down the list: Twitter.

Author: Changed to:

> And finally, let's look at one further down the list: Twitter.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-twitter-main-thread-impact.png",
  caption="Twitter impact on the main thread.",
  description="Bar chart showing the impact Twitter has on the main thread on mobile by blocking time, and transfer size by percentile. The blocking time is 0 milliseconds at the 10th percentile, 58 milliseconds at the 25th percentile, 134 milliseconds at the 50th percentile, 307 milliseconds at the 75th percentile, and 685 milliseconds at the 90th percentile. This correlates closely with the increase in transfer size from 132 kilobytes at the 10th and 25th percentiles, 148 KiB at 50th, 673 at the 75th and 1,538 at the 90th percentile.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=1661844053&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="1536436674",
  sql_file="third_parties_blocking_main_thread_percentiles.sql"
  )
}}

> Twitter as a third-party can be used in one of two ways: as a retargeting advertising tracker, and as a way of embedding tweets. Embedding tweets in pages is more popular than other social networks in my experience but has been <a hreflang="en" href="https://nooshu.com/blog/2021/02/06/using-puppeteer-and-squoosh-to-fix-twitter-embeds/">called out by many in the web performance community</a> as being pretty terrible for performance and our analysis above backs that up. Especially as those use cases will be diluted with the (presumably lighter) tracking use case in the above graph.

Author: Reworded to:

> Twitter as a third-party can be used in one of two ways: as a retargeting advertising tracker, and as a way of embedding tweets. Embedding tweets in pages is more popular than other social networks. However it has been called out as having an undue impact on the page by many in the web performance community, including <a href="https://twitter.com/TheRealNooshu">Matt Hobbs</a> in his <a hreflang="en" href="https://nooshu.com/blog/2021/02/06/using-puppeteer-and-squoosh-to-fix-twitter-embeds/">Using Puppeteer and Squoosh to fix the web performance of embedded tweets</a> post. Our analysis backs that up—especially as those use cases will be diluted with the (presumably lighter) tracking use case in the above graph.

While some of the above examples fare better or worse, it must be remembered that it's the cumulative effect of these which really impact the performance of a website. It's rare for websites to only use one of these, so add together Google Analytics, GTM loading Facebook and Twitter Tracking, on a page with a Map and an embedded Tweet, and it really starts to add up. Sometimes it's unsurprising why your phone sometimes feels too hot to handle, or your PC fan starts going into overdrive just from surfing the web!

> All this shows why the Google Developers recommend <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/embed-best-practices/">reducing the impact of embeds</a> (mostly their own ironically!), through the use of document ordering, lazy loading, facades, and other techniques. However, it's really quite infuriating that some of these are not the default and that advanced techniques like these must fall on the responsibility of the website owner. The third parties highlighted here really do have the resources, and technical know-how to reduce the impact of using their products for everyone by default but often choose not to. I started this performance section by saying that using third parties wasn't necessarily bad for performance, but these examples show there is certainly more that some of them can do in this area!

Author: Changed it to "Google recommend's".

Gonna leave the irony comment in as still consider the post published by Google on web.dev. But good to know.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="third-parties-timing-allow-origin-header-usage.png",
  caption="Timing-Allow-Origin header usage.",
  description="Bar chart showing the prevalence of the `timing-allow-origin` HTTP header on third-party requests over the last three years for desktop and mobile. In July 2019 this header was on 30.0% of desktop requests, and 31.9% of mobile requests. In August 2020 this increased to 31.5% and 31.3% respectively, but in July 2021 this decreased to 27.8% of desktop third-party requests and 26.7% of mobile third-party requests.",
chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTkT-CF5-NB7Oatd6XZq_08EoMGfiygKZtW4OwVivaaW3cIlt3ZcWNBtOdNePD_nKzkvb2nMlhWOX6g/pubchart?oid=626106432&format=interactive",

>   sheets_gid="1788549043",

Author: Done.

  sql_file="tao_by_third_party.sql"
  )
}}

Looking at the usage over the last three Web Almanac years usage has dropped considerably this year, instead of increasing, which is disappointing from a transparency and analysis perspective. Digging deeper into the data showed a 33% drop in Facebook requests and, as they supported this header and are widely used, this explains most of this drop. Interestingly the number of pages with Facebook usage actually increased, but it looks like Facebook have changed their embed to make fewer requests in the last year and, given their prevalence, that's made quite a dent on the usage of timing-allow-origin header. Ignoring that, usage of this header has basically stayed stable—which is a bit disappointing given the focus on performance with <a hreflang="en" href="https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2020/11/timing-for-page-experience">the ranking impact of the Core Web Vitals</a>.

> ## Security and Privacy

Reviewer: How can we make this section more data-driven?

Author: I spent a good bit of time on this, honestly I did, trying to come up with something more data driven, but unfortunately did not. It's apparently the last two year's chapters had the same problem.

None-the-less, I think they are important topics to cover, and think the chapter would be incomplete without this section.

It is difficult enough to set up CSP in the first place for the parts of the site in your control, without the added complexity of third parties making it even more difficult for things outside your control! Third parties really should get better at supporting CSP to make it easier for sites to reduce the risk of using them.

### Privacy

The privacy implications of using third parties is something we will again [leave to the chapter dedicated to this topic](./privacy), but what should already be apparent from above analysis is two things that majorly impact privacy of web users:

The prevalence of third-party usage on the web at just shy of 95% of websites.
The dominance of particular third parties, like Google and Facebook, who are not known for being on the side of privacy.

> Of course, one of the major reasons for using third parties on your site is for tracking for advertisement purposes which by its very nature is not going to be in the best privacy interests of your visitors. Alternatives to this pervasive tracking, which is basically only possible by the use of third parties, <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/floc/">have been suggested</a> but have failed to gain traction.

Reviewer: cc @maudnals 

```suggestion
Of course, one of the major reasons for using third parties on your site is for tracking for advertisement purposes, which by its very nature is not going to be in the best privacy interests of your visitors. Alternatives to this pervasive tracking, which is basically only possible by the use of third parties, <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/floc/">have been suggested (FLoC)</a> but have failed to gain traction.
```

Author: Changed it to this:

> Alternatives to this pervasive tracking, which is basically only possible by the use of third parties, have been suggested <a hreflang="en" href="https://blog.google/products/ads-commerce/2021-01-privacy-sandbox/">such as Google's Privacy Sandbox and FLoC iniative</a> but have failed to gain traction.

> What is perhaps more concerning is the tracking that can occur without website users and owners being aware. There is the old adage that if you're not paying for a product or service, then you are the product, and many third parties give away their product for "free", which for most means they are monetizing it in some other way—usually at the expense of your visitor's privacy!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is perhaps more concerning is the tracking that can occur without website users and owners being aware. There is the old adage that if you're not paying for a product or service, then you are the product. Many third parties give away their product for "free", which for most means they are monetizing it in some other way—usually at the expense of your visitors' privacy!
```

> Use of newer technologies like <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Feature-Policy">`feature-policy` and `permission-policy`</a> can restrict the usage of certain functionalities of the browser such as microphones and video cameras. These can reduce the privacy and security risks though many of these will usually be secured behind a browser prompt to ensure they are not silently activated. Google is also working on a <a hreflang="en" href="https://github.com/bslassey/privacy-budget">Privacy Budget proposal</a> to limit the privacy impact of web browser, though others <a hreflang="en" href="https://blog.mozilla.org/en/mozilla/google-privacy-budget-analysis/">remain sceptical of their work in this space</a>. All in all, adding privacy controls seems to be swimming against the tide given the intent of many third party resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adoption of newer technologies like <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Feature-Policy">`feature-policy` and `permission-policy`</a> can restrict the usage of certain functionalities of the browser, such as microphones and video cameras. These can reduce the privacy and security risks though many of these will usually be secured behind a browser prompt to ensure they are not silently activated. Google is also working on a <a hreflang="en" href="https://github.com/bslassey/privacy-budget">Privacy Budget proposal</a> to limit the privacy impact of web browser, though others <a hreflang="en" href="https://blog.mozilla.org/en/mozilla/google-privacy-budget-analysis/">remain skeptical of their work in this space</a>. All in all, adding privacy controls seems to be swimming against the tide given the intent of many third party resources.
```

## Conclusion

> Third parties are integral to the web. In many ways they are the web—without the prevalence of third parties, websites would be harder to build, and be less feature rich. As mentioned at the beginning, interconnectedness is at the very heart of the web, and third parties are the natural extension of this. Our analysis has shown that third parties are more prevalent than ever: sites without them are very much the exception!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Third parties are integral to the web. In many ways they are the web; without the prevalence of third parties, websites would be harder to build and less feature rich. As mentioned at the beginning, interconnectedness is at the very heart of the web, and third parties are the natural extension of this. Our analysis has shown that third parties are more prevalent than ever—sites without them are very much the exception!
```

However, using third parties is not without risks and in this chapter we have explored the performance impact of third parties and discussed the potential security and privacy risks of using them on your site.

There are consequences to needlessly loading up your website with every third-party tool, widget, tracker and whatever else you can think of. Site owners have a responsibility to look at the impact of all that third-party content and decide if the functionality is worth that potential impact.

> It's easy to get sucked into the negative however, so to finish off the chapter, I wish to circle back round to the positives. There is a reason that third parties are so prevalent and they are (usually!) used out of choice. Sharing is what the web is about and so third parties are very much in the spirit of the web. It's amazing what functionality we web developers have at our disposal and how easy it is to add them to our sites. But hopefully this chapter has opened your eyes a little more to give a little more thought to make sure you fully understand the deal you're making when you do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's easy to get sucked into the negative however, so to finish off the chapter, let's look back at the positives. There is a reason that third parties are so prevalent and they are (usually!) used out of choice. Sharing is what the web is about and so third parties are very much in the spirit of the web. It's amazing what functionality we web developers have at our disposal and how easy it is to add them to our sites. Hopefully this chapter has opened your eyes to give a little more thought to making sure you fully understand the deal you're making when you do that.
```
